The only way to make sense out of change is to plunge into it, move with it, and join the dance.
No valid plans for the future can be made by those who have no capacity for living now.
Trying to define yourself is like trying to bite your own teeth.

Soul Anatomy
ABOUT
CONTACT
DONATE
SUBMISSIONS
Dissecting what it means to be human.
Recently published:

12
8 Poems That Tell The Story of How To Change Your Life When It Feels Impossible
05/09/2017
13
Why Enlightenment is Not An End Goal But A Process
05/08/2017
6
The Universe Is Always Communicating With You, You Just Notice The Answers You Want To
05/08/2017
Trending:

26 Of The Most Mind-Opening Alan Watts Quotes
8 Subconscious Behaviors That Are Keeping You From Having The Life You Want
-61-6212
8 Poems That Tell The Story of How To Change Your Life When It Feels Impossible
What do you want to read?

What do you want to read?

 
alllan
26 Of The Most Mind-Opening Alan Watts Quotes



Alan Wilson Watts was a British philosopher, writer and speaker, who held both a Master’s in Theology and a Doctorate of Divinity. Famous for his research on comparative religion, he was best known as an interpreter and popularizer of Asian philosophies for a Western audience.

He wrote over 25 books and numerous articles on subjects such as personal identity, the true nature of reality, higher consciousness, the meaning of life, concepts and images of God and the non-material pursuit of happiness. In his books he relates his experience to scientific knowledge and to the teachings of Eastern and Western religion and philosophy.

Man suffers only because he takes seriously what the gods made for fun.

Your body does not eliminate poisons by knowing their names. To try to control fear or depression or boredom by calling them names is to resort to superstition of trust in curses and invocations. It is so easy to see why this does not work. Obviously, we try to know, name, and define fear in order to make it “objective,” that is, separate from “I.”

The question “what shall we do about it” is only asked by those who do not understand the problem. If a problem can be solved at all, to understand it and to know what to do about it are the same thing. On the other hand, doing something about a problem which you do not understand is like trying to clear away darkness by thrusting it aside with your hands. When light is brought, the darkness vanishes at once. This applies particularly to the problem.” 

Muddy water is best cleared by leaving it alone. 

This is the real secret of life – to be completely engaged with what you are doing in the here and now. And instead of calling it work, realize it is play.

The meaning of life is just to be alive. It is so plain and so obvious and so simple. And yet, everybody rushes around in a great panic as if it were necessary to achieve something beyond themselves.

To have faith is to trust yourself to the water. When you swim you don’t grab hold of the water, because if you do you will sink and drown. Instead you relax, and float. 

You are an aperture through which the universe is looking at and exploring itself.

Advice? I don’t have advice. Stop aspiring and start writing. If you’re writing, you’re a writer. Write like you’re a goddamn death row inmate and the governor is out of the country and there’s no chance for a pardon. Write like you’re clinging to the edge of a cliff, white knuckles, on your last breath, and you’ve got just one last thing to say, like you’re a bird flying over us and you can see everything, and please, for God’s sake, tell us something that will save us from ourselves. Take a deep breath and tell us your deepest, darkest secret, so we can wipe our brow and know that we’re not alone. Write like you have a message from the king. Or don’t. Who knows, maybe you’re one of the lucky ones who doesn’t have to.

Jesus Christ knew he was God. So wake up and find out eventually who you really are. In our culture, of course, they’ll say you’re crazy and you’re blasphemous, and they’ll either put you in jail or in a nut house (which is pretty much the same thing). However if you wake up in India and tell your friends and relations, ‘My goodness, I’ve just discovered that I’m God,’ they’ll laugh and say, ‘Oh, congratulations, at last you found out.

The art of living… is neither careless drifting on the one hand nor fearful clinging to the past on the other. It consists in being sensitive to each moment, in regarding it as utterly new and unique, in having the mind open and wholly receptive.

The more a thing tends to be permanent, the more it tends to be lifeless.

Never pretend to a love which you do not actually feel, for love is not ours to command.

Zen does not confuse spirituality with thinking about God while one is peeling potatoes. Zen spirituality is just to peel the potatoes.

We are living in a culture entirely hypnotized by the illusion of time, in which the so-called present moment is felt as nothing but an infintesimal hairline between an all-powerfully causative past and an absorbingly important future. We have no present. Our consciousness is almost completely preoccupied with memory and expectation. We do not realize that there never was, is, nor will be any other experience than present experience. We are therefore out of touch with reality. We confuse the world as talked about, described, and measured with the world which actually is. We are sick with a fascination for the useful tools of names and numbers, of symbols, signs, conceptions and ideas.

What we have forgotten is that thoughts and words are conventions, and that it is fatal to take conventions too seriously. A convention is a social convenience, as, for example, money … but it is absurd to take money too seriously, to confuse it with real wealth … In somewhat the same way, thoughts, ideas and words are “coins” for real things.

And people get all fouled up because they want the world to have meaning as if it were words… As if you had a meaning, as if you were a mere word, as if you were something that could be looked up in a dictionary. You are meaning.

To put is still more plainly: the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing. To hold your breath is to lose your breath. A society based on the quest for security is nothing but a breath-retention contest in which everyone is as taut as a drum and as purple as a beet.

What I am really saying is that you don’t need to do anything, because if you see yourself in the correct way, you are all as much extraordinary phenomenon of nature as trees, clouds, the patterns in running water, the flickering of fire, the arrangement of the stars, and the form of a galaxy. You are all just like that, and there is nothing wrong with you at all.

We seldom realize, for example, that our most private thoughts and emotions are not actually our own. For we think in terms of languages and images which we did not invent, but which were given to us by our society. We copy emotional reactions from our parents, learning from them that excrement is supposed to have a disgusting smell and that vomiting is supposed to be an unpleasant sensation. The dread of death is also learned from their anxieties about sickness and from their attitudes to funerals and corpses. Our social environment has this power just because we do not exist apart from a society. Society is our extended mind and body. Yet the very society from which the individual is inseparable is using its whole irresistible force to persuade the individual that he is indeed separate! Society as we now know it is therefore playing a game with self-contradictory rules.

The source of all light is in the eye.

Just as true humor is laughter at oneself, true humanity is knowledge
of oneself.

This, then, is the human problem: there is a price to be paid for every increase in consciousness. We cannot be more sensitive to pleasure without being more sensitive to pain. By remembering the past we can plan for the future. But the ability to plan for the future is offset by the “ability” to dread pain and to fear of the unknown. Furthermore, the growth of an acute sense of the past and future gives us a corresponding dim sense of the present. In other words, we seem to reach a point where the advantages of being conscious are outweighed by its disadvantages, where extreme sensitivity makes us unadaptable.

The art of meditation is a way of getting into touch with reality, and the reason for it is that most civilized people are out of touch with reality because they confuse the world as it with the world as they think about it and talk about it and describe it. For on the one hand there is the real world and on the other there is a whole system of symbols about that world which we have in our minds. These are very very useful symbols, all civilization depends on them, but like all good things they have their disadvantages, and the principle disadvantage of symbols is that we confuse them with reality, just as we confuse money with actual wealth.

We must abandon completely the notion of blaming the past for any kind of situation we’re in and reverse our thinking and see that the past always flows back form the present. That now is the creative point of life. So you see its like the idea of forgiving somebody, you change the meaning of the past by doing that…Also watch the flow of music. The melody as its expressed is changed by notes that come later. Just as the meaning of a sentence…you wait till later to find out what the sentence means…The present is always changing the past.

Peace can be made only by those who are peaceful, and love can be shown only by those who love. No work of love will flourish out of guilt, fear, or hollowness of heart, just as no valid plans for the future can be made by those who have no capacity for living now. 

Love this? Want more? Like Soul Anatomy on Facebook and follow us on Twitter.

Read this next:

You're Not Lonely, You're Disconnected From Yourself
The 4 Types Of Denial Holding Us Back (And How To Use Them To Reach The Truth)
What Andy Weir's "The Egg" Teaches Us About Religion, Philosophy And Ourselves
Alan Watts On How To Unburden Your Mind
03/15/2017
In "Everything"
The Philosophy Of Non-Resistance: The Difference Between "Going With The Flow" And Becoming A Doormat
11/24/2015
In "Everything"
8 Buddhist Facts You Don’t Know, But Should
02/15/2017
In "Everything"

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++


HomeMy Books
Browse ▾
Community ▾

Search books

Sign InJoin
Goodreads helps you follow your favorite authors. Be the first to learn about new releases!
Start by following Alan W. Watts.
Follow Author
Alan W. WattsAlan W. Watts > Quotes


more photos (4) 

Alan W. Watts quotes (showing 1-30 of 705)
“Trying to define yourself is like trying to bite your own teeth.” 
― Alan W. Watts
3053 likes Like
“We seldom realize, for example that our most private thoughts and emotions are not actually our own. For we think in terms of languages and images which we did not invent, but which were given to us by our society.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: civilization, culture, names, power-of-words, responsibility, wisdom 1060 likes Like
“Man suffers only because he takes seriously what the gods made for fun.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: buddhism, metaphysics, philosophy, religion, tao, taoism, theology, zen 985 likes Like
“This is the real secret of life -- to be completely engaged with what you are doing in the here and now. And instead of calling it work, realize it is play.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: life, play, work 813 likes Like
“The meaning of life is just to be alive. It is so plain and so obvious and so simple. And yet, everybody rushes around in a great panic as if it were necessary to achieve something beyond themselves.” 
― Alan W. Watts, The Culture of Counter-Culture: Edited Transcripts
810 likes Like
“Muddy water is best cleared by leaving it alone.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: process, time 757 likes Like
“To have faith is to trust yourself to the water. When you swim you don't grab hold of the water, because if you do you will sink and drown. Instead you relax, and float.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: faith, freedom, trust 634 likes Like
“Advice? I don’t have advice. Stop aspiring and start writing. If you’re writing, you’re a writer. Write like you’re a goddamn death row inmate and the governor is out of the country and there’s no chance for a pardon. Write like you’re clinging to the edge of a cliff, white knuckles, on your last breath, and you’ve got just one last thing to say, like you’re a bird flying over us and you can see everything, and please, for God’s sake, tell us something that will save us from ourselves. Take a deep breath and tell us your deepest, darkest secret, so we can wipe our brow and know that we’re not alone. Write like you have a message from the king. Or don’t. Who knows, maybe you’re one of the lucky ones who doesn’t have to.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: writing 574 likes Like
“The only way to make sense out of change is to plunge into it, move with it, and join the dance.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: change, dance, flow, impermanence, inspiration, reality, things, world 564 likes Like
“You are an aperture through which the universe is looking at and exploring itself.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: buddhism, metaphysical, philosophy 553 likes Like
“The menu is not the meal.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: language, metaphysics, names, nominalism, philosophy, power-of-words, words 496 likes Like
“You are a function of what the whole universe is doing in the same way that a wave is a function of what the whole ocean is doing.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: self, universe 449 likes Like
“I have realized that the past and future are real illusions, that they exist in the present, which is what there is and all there is.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: future, illusion, past, present, time 419 likes Like
“Through our eyes, the universe is perceiving itself. Through our ears, the universe is listening to its harmonies. We are the witnesses through which the universe becomes conscious of its glory, of its magnificence.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: harmony, self, universe 391 likes Like
“Jesus Christ knew he was God. So wake up and find out eventually who you really are. In our culture, of course, they’ll say you’re crazy and you’re blasphemous, and they’ll either put you in jail or in a nut house (which is pretty much the same thing). However if you wake up in India and tell your friends and relations, ‘My goodness, I’ve just discovered that I’m God,’ they’ll laugh and say, ‘Oh, congratulations, at last you found out.” 
― Alan W. Watts, The Essential Alan Watts
tags: awakening, blasphemy, god, hinduism, jesus-christ, self 380 likes Like
“The more a thing tends to be permanent, the more it tends to be lifeless.” 
― Alan W. Watts
337 likes Like
“The art of living... is neither careless drifting on the one hand nor fearful clinging to the past on the other. It consists in being sensitive to each moment, in regarding it as utterly new and unique, in having the mind open and wholly receptive.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: life, living 332 likes Like
“Try to imagine what it will be like to go to sleep and never wake up... now try to imagine what it was like to wake up having never gone to sleep.” 
― Alan W. Watts
291 likes Like
“Things are as they are. Looking out into the universe at night, we make no comparisons between right and wrong stars, nor between well and badly arranged constellations.” 
― Alan W. Watts
266 likes Like
“Every intelligent individual wants to know what makes him tick, and yet is at once fascinated and frustrated by the fact that oneself is the most difficult of all things to know.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: wisdom 264 likes Like
“We are living in a culture entirely hypnotized by the illusion of time, in which the so-called present moment is felt as nothing but an infintesimal hairline between an all-powerfully causative past and an absorbingly important future. We have no present. Our consciousness is almost completely preoccupied with memory and expectation. We do not realize that there never was, is, nor will be any other experience than present experience. We are therefore out of touch with reality. We confuse the world as talked about, described, and measured with the world which actually is. We are sick with a fascination for the useful tools of names and numbers, of symbols, signs, conceptions and ideas.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: expectation, memory, names, now, present, time 263 likes Like
“It's like you took a bottle of ink and you threw it at a wall. Smash! And all that ink spread. And in the middle, it's dense, isn't it? And as it gets out on the edge, the little droplets get finer and finer and make more complicated patterns, see? So in the same way, there was a big bang at the beginning of things and it spread. And you and I, sitting here in this room, as complicated human beings, are way, way out on the fringe of that bang. We are the complicated little patterns on the end of it. Very interesting. But so we define ourselves as being only that. If you think that you are only inside your skin, you define yourself as one very complicated little curlique, way out on the edge of that explosion. Way out in space, and way out in time. Billions of years ago, you were a big bang, but now you're a complicated human being. And then we cut ourselves off, and don't feel that we're still the big bang. But you are. Depends how you define yourself. You are actually--if this is the way things started, if there was a big bang in the beginning-- you're not something that's a result of the big bang. You're not something that is a sort of puppet on the end of the process. You are still the process. You are the big bang, the original force of the universe, coming on as whoever you are. When I meet you, I see not just what you define yourself as--Mr so-and- so, Ms so-and-so, Mrs so-and-so--I see every one of you as the primordial energy of the universe coming on at me in this particular way. I know I'm that, too. But we've learned to define ourselves as separate from it. ” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: zen 245 likes Like
“A scholar tries to learn something everyday; a student of Buddhism tries to unlearn something daily.” 
― Alan W. Watts
244 likes Like
“Tomorrow and plans for tomorrow can have no significance at all unless you are in full contact with the reality of the present, since it is in the present and only in the present that you live. There is no other reality than present reality, so that, even if one were to live for endless ages, to live for the future would be to miss the point everlastingly.” 
― Alan W. Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety
238 likes Like
“Problems that remain persistently insoluble should always be suspected as questions asked in the wrong way.” 
― Alan W. Watts, The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are
tags: philosophy 232 likes Like
“Never pretend to a love which you do not actually feel, for love is not ours to command.” 
― Alan W. Watts
tags: feigned-affection 217 likes Like
“Life is like music for its own sake. We are living in an eternal now, and when we listen to music we are not listening to the past, we are not listening to the future, we are listening to an expanded present.” 
― Alan W. Watts
213 likes Like
“When we attempt to exercise power or control over someone else, we cannot avoid giving that person the very same power or control over us.”
― Alan W. Watts, The Way of Zen
208 likes Like
“Zen does not confuse spirituality with thinking about God while one is peeling potatoes. Zen spirituality is just to peel the potatoes.” 
― Alan W. Watts
206 likes Like
“What we have forgotten is that thoughts and words are conventions, and that it is fatal to take conventions too seriously. A convention is a social convenience, as, for example, money ... but it is absurd to take money too seriously, to confuse it with real wealth ... In somewhat the same way, thoughts, ideas and words are "coins" for real things.” 
― Alan W. Watts, The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety
tags: concepts, philosophy, theory, words 193 likes Like
« previous 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 … 23 24 next »

All Quotes | Add A Quote

Find quotes by keyword, author
 Search
Play The 'Guess That Quote' Game 

BOOKS BY ALAN W. WATTS
The Way of Zen The Way of Zen
11,457 ratings
Open Preview
The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are
10,205 ratings
Open Preview
The Wisdom of Insecurity: A Message for an Age of Anxiety The Wisdom of Insecurity
6,995 ratings
Open Preview
Tao: The Watercourse Way Tao
2,642 ratings
More…

VIDEOS ABOUT THIS AUTHOR
Work As Play
Add a comment
More videos...

© 2017 Goodreads Inc about us advertise author program jobs api our blog authors & advertisers blog terms privacy help switch to: mobile version

