FBI Regional Bureau Chief Gordon Cole (David Lynch) sends agents Chester Desmond (Chris Isaak) and Sam Stanley (Kiefer Sutherland) to investigate the murder of drifter and teenage prostitute Teresa Banks in the town of Deer Meadow, Oregon. Desmond and Stanley view Teresa's body at the local morgue. They notice that a ring is missing from her finger and a small piece of paper printed with the letter "T" has been inserted under one of her fingernails. Later, Desmond discovers Teresa's missing ring under a trailer. As he reaches out to it, he is taken by an unseen force.

The following day at FBI headquarters in Philadelphia, Cole and Agent Dale Cooper (Kyle MacLachlan) experience a brief vision of their long-lost colleague Agent Phillip Jeffries (David Bowie). He tells them about a meeting he witnessed involving several mysterious spirits—the Man from Another Place, Killer Bob, Mrs. Chalfont (Frances Bay) and her grandson. Agent Cooper is sent to Deer Meadow to investigate Desmond's disappearance. He finds no answers but is certain Teresa's killer will strike again.

One year later in Twin Peaks, high school homecoming queen Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee) and her best friend Donna Hayward (Moira Kelly) attend school. Laura is addicted to cocaine and is cheating on her boyfriend, the arrogant and ill-tempered jock, Bobby Briggs (Dana Ashbrook), with the biker James Hurley (James Marshall). Laura realizes pages are missing from her secret diary, and gives the rest of the diary to her friend, the agoraphobic recluse Harold Smith (Lenny Von Dohlen).

Mrs. Chalfont and her grandson appear to Laura. They warn her that the "man behind the mask" is in her bedroom. Laura runs home, where she sees Bob. She rushes outside in terror and is startled to see her father, Leland (Ray Wise), emerge from the house. That evening Leland's behavior is erratic—he accusingly asks her about her romances then tenderly tells her he loves her.

Laura has a dream about entering the Black Lodge. Cooper and the Man from Another Place appear in her dream. The Man from Another Place tells Cooper that he is "the arm" and offers Teresa's ring to Laura, but Cooper tells her not to take it. Laura finds Annie Blackburn (Heather Graham) next to her in bed, covered in blood. Annie tells Laura to write in her diary that "the good Dale" is trapped in the Lodge and can't leave. When she wakes up, Laura sees the ring in her hand.

The next evening, Laura goes to the Bang Bang Bar to meet her drug connections and have sex with strange men. Unexpectedly, the normally chaste Donna shows up. They all go to the Pink Room. Laura discusses Teresa Banks' murder with Ronette Pulaski (Phoebe Augustine), and Ronette says that Teresa was trying to blackmail someone. When she sees a topless Donna making out with a stranger, a distraught Laura takes her home and begs Donna not become like her. The next morning, Leland drives Laura home. On the way home, Philip Gerard/Mike (Al Strobel), the one-armed man who is also possessed by a demon, pulls up alongside Leland's car and shouts at Leland that "the thread will be torn", and shows Teresa's ring to Laura, but Leland and Laura become frightened and drive away.

Leland recalls his affair with Teresa. He had asked Teresa to set up a foursome and invite some of her friends, but fled when he discovered Laura was among them. Teresa realized who he was and plotted to blackmail him, and he killed her to prevent his secrets from being revealed. Laura realizes that Mike's ring was the same one from her dream, and was also worn by Teresa.

The next night, Bob comes through Laura's window and begins having sex with her only to transform into Leland. The next morning she warns him to stay away from her. Upset, Laura uses more cocaine and has trouble concentrating at school. When Bobby realizes Laura was only using him to score cocaine, he breaks off their relationship. Subsequently, Laura breaks up with James, then goes to a cabin in the woods to have an orgy with Ronette, Jacques and Leo. Leland has followed her there and, after attacking Jacques and Leo, takes Laura and Ronette to an abandoned train car.

Laura asks Leland if he is going to kill her, but Bob appears and tells Laura he intends to possess her. Mike has tracked Leland/Bob to the train, but when Ronette tries to let him in, Leland beats her unconscious. Mike manages to throw in Teresa's ring. Laura puts it on, which prevents Bob from possessing her. Enraged, Bob stabs Laura to death.

Leland/Bob places Laura's body in the lake. As her corpse drifts away, he enters the Red Room where he encounters Mike and the Man from Another Place who announce they want their share of "garmonbozia." As Laura's body is found by the Sheriff's department, Agent Cooper comforts her spirit in the Black Lodge.