    
Lost Highway (film)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Lost Highway
Lost-Higway-01.jpg
Theatrical release poster
Directed by     David Lynch
Produced by     Mary Sweeney
Tom Sternberg
Deepak Nayar
Written by  David Lynch
Barry Gifford
Starring    

    Bill Pullman
    Patricia Arquette
    Balthazar Getty
    Robert Blake
    Natasha Gregson Wagner
    Gary Busey
    Robert Loggia

Music by    Angelo Badalamenti
Cinematography  Peter Deming
Edited by   Mary Sweeney
Production
company
    
Ciby 2000
Asymmetrical Productions
Distributed by  October Films
Release date
    

    February 21, 1997

Running time
    134 minutes[1][2]
Country     France
United States
Language    English
Budget  $15 million
Box office  $3.7 million (North America)[3]

Lost Highway is a 1997 French-American film written and directed by David Lynch. It stars Bill Pullman as a man convicted of murdering his wife (Patricia Arquette), after which he inexplicably morphs into a young mechanic and begins leading a new life. The movie, which has noir elements, features the last film appearances of Robert Blake, Jack Nance, and Richard Pryor, and the acting debut of Marilyn Manson.

Lynch co-wrote the screenplay with Barry Gifford, whose novel served as the basis for Lynch's film Wild at Heart (1990). Lynch conceived Lost Highway after the critical and box office failure of Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992), a film adaptation and follow-up to the cult television series Twin Peaks.

Despite receiving mixed reviews upon release, Lost Highway has developed a cult following and is greatly admired by some critics.[4] In 2003, the film was adapted as an opera.

Contents

    1 Plot
    2 Cast
    3 Production
        3.1 Development
        3.2 Filming
        3.3 Music
    4 Reception
    5 Home media
    6 See also
    7 References
    8 Further reading
    9 External links

Plot

Fred Madison (Bill Pullman), a Los Angeles saxophonist, receives a message on the intercom of his house: "Dick Laurent is dead". During a break at a show one night, Fred calls his home, but his wife Renée (Patricia Arquette) does not answer. Arriving home later, Fred finds her sleeping in their bed. The next morning, Renée finds a VHS tape on their porch which contains a videotape of their house. After having sex one night, Fred sees Renée's face as that of a pale old man, then tells Renée of a dream he had about someone resembling her being attacked. As the days pass, more tapes arrive showing the interior of their house and even shots of the pair asleep in bed. Fred and Renée call the police but the detectives they send over offer no assistance.

Fred and Renée then attend a party being thrown by her friend Andy (Michael Massee). At the party, the man Fred dreamed about approaches Fred, claiming to have met him before. The man then says he is at Fred's house at that very moment and even answers the house phone when Fred calls it. Fred learns from Andy that the man is a friend of Dick Laurent's. Terrified, Fred leaves the party and heads home with Renée. The next morning, another tape arrives and Fred watches it alone. To his horror, it shows him hovering over Renée's dismembered body. He is sentenced to death for her murder. While on death row, Fred is plagued by headaches and visions of the Mystery Man, a burning cabin in the desert and a strange man driving down a dark highway.

During a cell check, the prison guard finds that the man in Fred's cell is now Pete Dayton (Balthazar Getty), a young auto mechanic. Pete is released into the care of his parents, who take him home and allude to - but never fully explain - his disappearance. Pete is followed by two detectives who are trying to find out more about him. The next day, Pete returns to work at the garage where gangster Mr. Eddy (Robert Loggia), asks him to fix his car. Mr. Eddy takes Pete for a drive, on which Pete witnesses Mr. Eddy chase and beat down a tailgater. The next day, Mr. Eddy returns to the garage with his mistress, Alice Wakefield (also played by Arquette) and his Cadillac for Pete to repair. Later, Alice returns to the garage alone and invites Pete out for dinner. Soon, Pete and Alice begin an affair. Alice fears that Mr. Eddy suspects them, and concocts a scheme to rob her friend Andy and leave town. Alice then reveals to Pete that Mr. Eddy is actually an amateur porn producer named Dick Laurent.

Pete gets a phone call from Mr. Eddy and the Mystery Man, which frightens Pete so much that he decides to go along with Alice's plan. Pete ambushes Andy and accidentally kills him. Pete notices a photograph showing Alice and Renée together, with Alice claiming that she is the blonde woman in the photo. Later, when police are at the house investigating Andy's death, Alice is inexplicably missing from the photo.

Pete and Alice arrive at an empty cabin in the desert, the same one Fred had envisioned. The two start having sex, which ends with Alice getting up and disappearing into the cabin. Pete suddenly transforms back into Fred. Upon searching the cabin, he meets the Mystery Man, who begins filming and chasing Fred with a hand-held video camera, revealing himself to be responsible for the videotapes. Fred escapes and drives to the Lost Highway Hotel, where he finds Mr. Eddy and Renée having sex. After Renée leaves, Fred kidnaps Mr. Eddy, beats him and slits his throat. The Mystery Man then shoots Mr. Eddy dead and whispers something to Fred. The Mystery Man disappears and Fred drives off in Mr. Eddy's car. Fred drives to his old house, buzzes the intercom and says: "Dick Laurent is dead". When the two detectives drive up to the house, Fred runs back to his car and drives off, with the detectives in pursuit. Fred suddenly begins convulsing and screaming as his car speeds down the darkened highway.
Cast

    Bill Pullman as Fred Madison
    Patricia Arquette as Renee Madison/Alice Wakefield
    Balthazar Getty as Pete Dayton
    Robert Loggia as Mr. Eddy/Dick Laurent
    Robert Blake as The Mystery Man
    Gary Busey as Bill Dayton, Pete's father
    Lucy Butler as Candace Dayton, Pete's mother
    Michael Massee as Andy
    Richard Pryor as Arnie
    Natasha Gregson Wagner as Sheila
    John Roselius as Al
    Louis Eppolito as Ed
    Jack Nance as Phil, a mechanic
    Scott Coffey as Teddy
    Al Garrett as Carl
    Giovanni Ribisi as Steve "V"
    Henry Rollins as Guard Henry
    Michael Shamus Wiles as Guard Mike
    Mink Stole (voice only) as Forewoman
    Marilyn Manson and Twiggy Ramirez as porn stars

Blake, who portrayed The Mystery Man in the film, was responsible for the look and style of his character.[5] One day, he decided to cut his hair short, part it in the middle, and apply white Kabuki make-up on his face. He then put on a black outfit and approached Lynch, who loved what he had done.[5]

Years earlier, Loggia had expressed interest in playing the role of Frank Booth in Blue Velvet (1986). He showed up for an audition, unaware that Dennis Hopper had already been cast, and proceeded to wait for three hours, growing increasingly agitated. Upon seeing Lynch and learning of Hopper's casting, Loggia launched into a profanity-laden rant, which Lynch recalled years later when casting Lost Highway and would eventually become Mr. Eddy's road rage scene.[6]

Lost Highway features the last film performances of Blake, Jack Nance, and Richard Pryor.
Production
Development

Lynch came across the phrase "lost highway" in Barry Gifford's Night People and mentioned to the writer how much he loved it as a title for a film.[7] Lynch suggested that they write a screenplay together. Gifford agreed and they began to brainstorm. Both men had their own different ideas of what the film should be and they ended up rejecting each other's and also their own.[7] On the last night of shooting Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me, Lynch was driving home and thought of the first third of Lost Highway all the way up to "the fist hitting Fred in the police station – to suddenly being in another place and not knowing how he got there or what is wrong."[7] He told Gifford and they began writing the screenplay. The two men realized early on that a transformation had to occur and another story developed which would have several links to the first story but also differ.[8] While they were writing the script, Lynch came up with an idea of a man and woman at a party and while they are there another, younger man is introduced who is "out of place, doesn't know anybody there, comes with a younger girl who knows a lot of the people. The girl is actually drawing him into a strange thing, but he doesn't know it. And he starts talking to this young guy who says strange things to him, similar to what The Mystery Man says to Fred Madison."[7] Lynch recalls that the character, "came out of a feeling of a man who, whether real or not, gave the impression that he was supernatural."[9] Gifford describes the Mystery Man as "a product of Fred's imagination" and is "the first visible manifestation of Fred's madness."[5]

According to Lynch, the opening scene of the film where Fred Madison hears the words "Dick Laurent is dead" over his intercom really happened to him at his home.[7] During filming, Deborah Wuliger, the unit publicist, came upon the idea of a psychogenic fugue which Lynch and Gifford subsequently incorporated into the film. Lynch recalls, "The person suffering from it creates in their mind a completely new identity, new friends, new home, new everything—they forget their past identity."[10]
Filming

Lost Highway was shot in approximately 84 days; from November 29, 1995, until February 22, 1996, funded with a moderately large budget of $15 million from the French production company StudioCanal.[11] A vast majority of the film was shot in locations throughout California, in Los Angeles, with the desert scenes being filmed in Nevada. Lynch owns the property used for Fred and Renee's mansion, and designed it himself, along with most of the furniture.[7] The interior shots of the "Lost Highway Hotel" were filmed at the Amargosa Hotel in Death Valley, which is believed to be haunted.[7][12]

The first cut of the film ran just over two-and-a-half hours. After a screening with 50 people, Lynch cut out 25 minutes of footage, including a scene portraying Renee/Alice's autopsy.[7]

Lynch would later link the film to the O. J. Simpson murder case: a jealous man's state of mind who has indeed committed, and then denies, murder, even to himself.[13]
Music
Main article: Lost Highway (soundtrack)

The film's score was composed by Angelo Badalamenti, with additional music by Barry Adamson.

For years, Trent Reznor had tried to contact Lynch to see if he would be interested in directing a video for his band Nine Inch Nails, but had no success.[14] After his work on the Natural Born Killers soundtrack, Reznor received a call asking if he would be interested in doing the same thing for Lost Highway. Reznor talked to Lynch on the phone and the filmmaker asked if he would also be interested in composing original music for the film.[14] When Reznor agreed, Lynch traveled to New Orleans, where the musician was living, and together they created music that accompanied the scenes in which Fred and Renee watch the mysterious video tapes, a brand new song called "The Perfect Drug," and "Driver Down," a song featured at the end of the film. Reznor also produced and assembled the soundtrack album.[14]

Lynch chose two songs by the German band Rammstein; "Heirate Mich" and "Rammstein." The band based the video for the latter song on this film. The majority of the video is made with clips from Lost Highway.

David Bowie's song "I'm Deranged" was played during the intro and the end credits, in different edit versions, and appears on the soundtrack.
Reception

Lost Highway premiered on February 27, 1997 in the United States on a limited theatrical release. The film received mostly lukewarm reviews, with many criticizing the film as obscure in plot or meaningless entirely, but it received praise for its visual aesthetic and the cast's performances. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 60% based on reviews from 42 critics, with an average rating of 6.1 out of 10.[15] Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, gives the film a score of 52 based on 21 reviews.[16]

Andy Klein of the Dallas Observer considered it superior to Lynch's two previous films: "His most thoroughly surreal work since Eraserhead, this two-hour-plus fever dream is more of one piece than Fire Walk with Me and less desperate and jokey than Wild at Heart."[17] In the Chicago Reader, Jonathan Rosenbaum praised it as "an audacious move away from conventional narrative and back toward the formal beauty of Eraserhead".[18]

Kenneth Turan, on the other hand, wrote, "Beautifully made but emotionally empty, this 1997 release exists only for the sensation of its provocative moments."[19] Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert gave the film "two thumbs down" – though Lynch used this to his advantage by claiming it was "two more great reasons to see Lost Highway", with the 'two thumbs down' used in newspaper ads.[20] Ebert argued, "Lynch is such a talented director. Why does he pull the rug out from under his own films? […] He knows how to put effective images on the screen, and how to use a soundtrack to create mood, but at the end of the film, our hand closes on empty air."[21]

The film was nominated for the Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics.

In a retrospective review, Jeremiah Kipp of Slant gave Lost Highway three and a half out of four stars and declared that the work "is not an artistic failure; in many ways, it's Lynch at his most daring, emotional, and personal."[22] In 2010, Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club inducted it into the website's "The New Cult Canon" section, viewing it as "more cohesive than it might appear at first blush" and arguing that Lynch "goes digging for truths that people don’t know or won’t acknowledge about themselves—within dreams, within the subconscious, within those impossibly dark hallways where we fear to tread." Tobias also implied that certain plot points in the work may have influenced Michael Haneke's Hidden.[23] Lost Highway later received five votes in the 2012 Sight & Sound critics' poll of the greatest films ever made.[4]

Cultural critic Slavoj Žižek interprets the film's bipartite structure as exploiting "the opposition of two horrors: the phantasmatic horror of the nightmarish noir universe of perverse sex, betrayal, and murder, and the (perhaps much more unsettling) despair of our drab, alienated daily life of impotence and distrust."[24]
Home media
    This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

In 2003, the film was released on DVD in Canada, through Seville Pictures, in a pan & scan format used for an earlier VHS release. On March 25, 2008, it was released on DVD in the United States, through Universal Studios' Focus Features label, and presented in anamorphic widescreen in the 2.35:1 ratio with Dolby Digital 5.1 audio; it was also released on laserdisc in the same aspect ratio (letterboxed). The film has been released on DVD in Australia numerous times: first by Shock Records in 2001, followed by mk2 in 2007, and again by Madman Entertainment on February 8, 2012.
See also

    Detour (1945 film)
    List of films featuring surveillance
    Lost Highway, a 2003 opera adaptation by Olga Neuwirth and Elfriede Jelinek

References

"LOST HIGHWAY (18)". British Board of Film Classification. February 2, 1997. Retrieved October 26, 2014.
"Lost Highway". American Film Institute. Retrieved 7 February 2017.
"Lost Highway (1997) - Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 17 February 2016.
"Votes for Lost Highway (1996)". British Film Institute. Retrieved November 6, 2016.
Biodrowski, Steve (April 1997), "Lost Highway - Mystery Man", Cinefantastique
Bergan, Ronald (December 6, 2015). "Robert Loggia obituary". The Guardian.
Lynch, David; Gifford, Barry (1997), "Introduction, Funny How Secrets Travel", Lynch on Lynch, Faber & Faber
Henry, Michael (November 1996). "The Moebius Strip - Conversation with David Lynch". Postif.
Szebin, Frederick; Biodrowski, Steve (April 1997), David Lynch on "Lost Highway", Cinefantastique
Swezey, Stuart (Winter 1997). "911 - David Lynch, Phone Home". Filmmaker.
David, Anna (November, 2001). "Twin Piques", Premiere Magazine, 15 (3), p. 80–81.
Mulvihill, John. "Lost Highway Hotel"
Emerson, Jim (23 Jan 2007), "Take Mulholland Dr. to the Lost Highway, Inland Empire exit…", Chicago Sun-Times, retrieved 2012-08-07
Blackwell, Mark (February 1997). "Sharp Electronics". Raygun.
"Lost Highway (1997)". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. Retrieved June 17, 2007.
"Lost Highway (1997): Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved June 11, 2007.
Klein, Andy (February 27, 1997). "A bumpy ride". Dallas Observer. Retrieved November 6, 2016.
Rosenbaum, Jonathan (February 28, 1997). "Splitting Images [THREE LIVES AND ONLY ONE DEATH & LOST HIGHWAY]". Chicago Reader. Retrieved December 8, 2016.
Turan, Kenneth (February 22, 1998). "Lost Highway". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 25, 2017.
"Lost Highway promotional pictures".
Ebert, Roger (February 27, 1997). "Lost Highway Movie Review & Film Summary". Retrieved December 8, 2016.
Kipp, Jeremiah (April 1, 2008). "Lost Highway". Slant. Retrieved January 25, 2017.
Tobias, Scott (July 9, 2009). "Lost Highway". Onion Inc. Retrieved January 25, 2017.

    Wilson, Emma (2006). Alain Resnais. Manchester University Press. p. 142. ISBN 0-7190-6406-6.

Further reading

    Žižek, Slavoj (2000). The Art of the Ridiculous Sublime, on David Lynch's Lost Highway. University of Washington Press. ISBN 0-295-97925-9.

External links
    Wikiquote has quotations related to: Lost Highway (film)

    Lost Highway at the Internet Movie Database
    Lost Highway at Box Office Mojo
    Lost Highway at Rotten Tomatoes
    Lost Highway at Metacritic

[hide]

    v t e 

David Lynch

    Early life Filmography Discography Bibliography Accolades Frequent collaborators 

Directorial
works   
Feature films
    

    Eraserhead (1977) The Elephant Man (1980) Dune (1984) Blue Velvet (1986) Wild at Heart (1990) Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992) Lost Highway (1997) The Straight Story (1999) Mulholland Drive (2001) Inland Empire (2006) 

Short films
    

    Six Men Getting Sick (Six Times) The Alphabet The Grandmother The Amputee The Cowboy and the Frenchman Industrial Symphony No. 1 Premonition Following An Evil Deed Darkened Room Rabbits DumbLand Bug Crawls Boat Absurda Lady Blue Shanghai Idem Paris 

Music videos
    

    "Wicked Game" "Longing" "Shot in the Back of the Head" "Came Back Haunted" 

Television  

    Twin Peaks (1990-1991) American Chronicles On the Air Hotel Room Twin Peaks (2017) 

Albums  

    BlueBOB (with John Neff) Polish Night Music (with Marek Zebrowski) Crazy Clown Time The Big Dream 

Books   

    Catching the Big Fish Images Genealogies of Pain Dark Night of the Soul 

Productions     

    Surveillance My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done? 

Awards by film  

    The Elephant Man Blue Velvet Wild at Heart 

Related     

    Jennifer Lynch (daughter) The Angriest Dog in the World David Lynch: The Art Life Lynch on Lynch Ronnie Rocket Frank Booth 

Authority control   

    WorldCat Identities VIAF: 177786181 GND: 4484235-1 SUDOC: 066926270 BNF: cb137507582 (data) 

Categories:

    1997 filmsEnglish-language filmsFrench filmsAmerican filmsFilms directed by David LynchScreenplays by David LynchFilms set in Los AngelesFilms shot in CaliforniaFilms shot in Los AngelesFrench independent filmsFilm scores by Angelo BadalamentiAmerican independent films

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikiquote

Languages

    Català
    Deutsch
    Emiliàn e rumagnòl
    Español
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Հայերեն
    Hrvatski
    Italiano
    Latviešu
    Magyar
    Bahasa Melayu
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Norsk bokmål
    Polski
    Português
    Русский
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Türkçe
    Українська

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 3 May 2017, at 23:18.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation    
    Powered by MediaWiki    

